Update APNs and ABM set up guide (#10895)
fleetdm/fleet: docs/Using-Fleet/MDM-setup.md

# Overview

MDM features require Apple's Push Notification service (APNs) to control and secure Apple devices. This guide will walk you through how to generate and upload a valid APNs certificate to Fleet in order to use Fleet's MDM features.

[Automated Device Enrollment](https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT204142) allows Macs to automatically enroll to Fleet when they are first set up. This guide will walk you through how to connect Apple Business Manager (ABM) to Fleet. Note that this is only required if you are using Automated Device Enrollment AKA Device Enrollment Program (DEP) AKA "Zero-touch."

# Requirements
To use Fleet's MDM features you must have:
1. A [deployed Fleet instance](../Deploying/Introduction.md)
2. A Fleet user with the admin role

## Apple Push Notification service (APNs)
Apple uses APNs to authenticate and manage interactions between Fleet and the host. 

To connect Fleet to APNs, we will do the following steps:
1. Generate four required files

> 2. Generate an APNs certificate from APNs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Generate an APNs certificate from Apple Push Certificates Portal
```
Minor nit: User goes to Apple Push Certificates Portal. Below screenshot is from here: https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT208643
![Screenshot 2023-04-03 at 10 08 14 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47070608/229534397-4395f5cb-a0fd-45ad-bbd9-51eaaa458688.png)

3. Configure Fleet with the required files

### Step 1: generate required files
For the MDM protocol to function, we need to generate the four following files:
1. APNs certificate 
2. APNs private key 
3. Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol (SCEP) certificate 
4. SCEP private key

The APNs certificates serves as authentication between Fleet and Apple, while the SCEP certificates serve as authentication between Fleet and hosts.

To do this, choose the "Fleet UI" or "fleetctl" method and follow the steps below.

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

> 2. Under **Apple Push Certificates Portal**, select "Request," then fill out the form. This should generate three files and send an email to you with an attached CSR file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Under **Apple Push Certificates Portal**, select **Request**, then fill out the form. This should generate three files and send an email to you with an attached CSR file.
```

Heads up, I think we're using **bold** styles to call out Fleet UI elements elsewhere in the docs.

`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>`. This should download three files and send an email to you with an attached CSR file.

> ### Step 2: generate an APNs certificate from APNs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: generate an APNs certificate from Apple Push Certificates Portal
```

1. Log in to or enroll in [Apple Push Certificates Portal](https://identity.apple.com).
2. Select **Create a Certificate**

> 3. Upload your CSR and input a friendly name, such as "Fleet MDM."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Upload your CSR and input a friendly name, such as "Fleet."
```

Really minor nit. I think we can suggest that users call their MDM server "Fleet."

Why? From the marketing team:

> We need to be specific about how we are talking about this product. From here on out the product Fleet is an MDM. So instead of saying Fleet MDM, or Fleet's MDM we should instead be saying Fleet. In this sentence we would replace "excited to announce Fleet MDM" with "excited to announce that Fleet is now an MDM

4. Download the APNs certificate

> Take note of the Apple ID you use to sign into Apple Push Certificates Portal. You'll need to use the same Apple ID when renewing your APNs certificate.

### Step 3: configure Fleet with the required files

With the four generated files, we now give them to the Fleet server. 

Restart the Fleet server with the contents of the APNs certificate, APNs private key, SCEP certificate, and SCEP private key in following environment variables:
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-key-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_SCEP_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-scep-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_SCEP_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-scep-key-bytes)

> You do not need to provide the APNs CSR which was emailed to you. 

> Confirm that Fleet is set up by visitng the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm that Fleet is set up by visiting the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."
```

Typo

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

2. Look at the **Apple Push Certificates Portal** section.

`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl get mdm-apple`.

> You should see information about the APNs certificate such as serial number and renewal date. 

Reviewer: Nice. I like this confirmation step.

## Renewing APNs

> Apple requires that APNs certificates are renewed once every year. 
> * Be sure to do it early. If you renew after a certificate has expired, you will have to turn MDM off and back on for all macOS hosts. 

> > * Be sure to use the same Apple ID from year-to-year. If you don't, you will have to unenroll and re-enroll all macOS hosts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * Be sure to use the same Apple ID from year-to-year. If you don't, you will have to turn MDM off and back on for all macOS hosts.
```

I think we should be consistent about using "turn on/off" for MDM instead of "enroll/unenroll." 

In Fleet, turn on/off is for MDM enrollment, enroll/unenroll is for osquery enrollment. 

All hosts, regardless of MDM features, enroll to Fleet.

What do you think?

Author: Yikes. I see the case there. However, I think elsewhere in our app, and maybe more difficult in 3rd party language, it says "enroll/unenroll." Need to think on this.

Restart the Fleet server with the contents of the APNs certificate, APNs private key, SCEP certificate, and SCEP private key in following environment variables:
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-key-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_SCEP_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-scep-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_SCEP_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-scep-key-bytes)

> You do not need to provide the APNs CSR which was emailed to you. 

Confirm that Fleet is set up by visitng the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

2. Look at the **Apple Push Certificates Portal** section.

`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl get mdm-apple`.

You should see information about the APNs certificate such as serial number and renewal date. 

## Renewing APNs

> Apple requires that APNs certificates are renewed once every year. 

> > * Be sure to do it early. If you renew after a certificate has expired, you will have to turn MDM off and back on for all macOS hosts. 

Author: @noahtalerman is this true? This is how I interpreted a line from previous: 
> If you don't renew and get a new certificate, you will have to turn MDM off and back on for all macOS hosts.

Reviewer: Hmm, I'm not sure...I think you can renew after expiration w/o having to turn MDM off and back on.

@mna is this true?

Reviewer 2: Looking back at the PR that introduced this paragraph, I can't see any comment around that, but yeah, that certainly comes from a mention in documentation somewhere. Closest I could find is this, which mentions re-enrollment: https://discussions.apple.com/thread/7085077

This link (Microsoft about Apple) mentions a grace period of 30 days: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/mem/intune/enrollment/apple-mdm-push-certificate-get

A quick googling doesn't show actual Apple docs, though.

How to renew the certificate if it's expired or about to expire:

> 1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. Make sure you use the same Apple ID email address that you used when generating the original certificate.

Reviewer: Oh, at some point I thought you did.

@mna just double checking, do you need to use the same email for generating APNs CSR for renewal?

> 1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. Make sure you use the same Apple ID email address that you used when generating the original certificate.

Reviewer 2: This is what we discussed and decided at the time: https://github.com/fleetdm/fleet/pull/9471#discussion_r1085437280

> 1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. Make sure you use the same Apple ID email address that you used when generating the original certificate.

Author: Hey @xpkoala I'm following up on @mna's linked comment above. Did you have a chance to test the renewal with different emails?

> 1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. Make sure you use the same Apple ID email address that you used when generating the original certificate.

Reviewer 3: @zhumo I don't believe I did. Let me test that now and see what happens.

2. Follow the on-screen instructions.

### Pending hosts
Some time after you purchase a Mac through Apple or an authorized reseller, but before it has been set up, the Mac will appear in ABM as in transit. When the Mac appears in ABM, it will also appear in Fleet with **MDM status** set to "Pending." After the new host is set up, the **MDM Status** will change to "On" and the host will be assigned to the default team.

### Default team

All automatically-enrolled hosts will be assigned to a default team of your choosing after they are unboxed and set up. If no default team is set, then the host will be placed in the "No Teams" category. The host will receive the configurations and behaviors set for that team.

> > After a host enrolls it can be transferred to a different team. Learn how [here](./Teams.md#transfer-hosts-to-a-team). Transferring a host automatically enforces the new team's settings and removes the old team's settings.

Reviewer: @zhumo yes it's true but the current sentence might be confusing. You can transfer a host to a not-default team _before or after_ it enrolls.

Because, the "before it enrolls" use case has come up from a customer, I updated the sentence to cover this use case instead.

2. Click **Renew** next to the expired certificate 
3. Upload your CSR
4. Download the new APNs certificate

### Step 3: configure Fleet with the required files

With the two generated files, we now give them to the Fleet server. 

Restart the Fleet server with the contents of the APNs certificate and APNs private key in following environment variables:
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-key-bytes)

> You do not need to provide the APNs CSR which was emailed to you.

### Step 4: confirm Fleet is updated
Confirm that Fleet is set up by visiting the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

2. Look at the **Apple Push Certificates Portal** section.

2. Follow the on-screen instructions.
`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl get mdm-apple`.

You should see information about the new APNs certificate such as serial number and renewal date. 

## Renewing SCEP

> The SCEP certificates generated by Fleet and uploaded to the environment variables expire every 10 years. To renew them, regenerate the keys aand update the relevant environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SCEP certificates generated by Fleet and uploaded to the environment variables expire every 10 years. To renew them, regenerate the keys and update the relevant environment variables.
```

Typo

How to renew the certificate if it's expired or about to expire:

1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. 

2. Sign in to [Apple Push Certificates Portal](https://identity.apple.com) using the same Apple ID you used to get your original certificate. 

3. In the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page, under Apple Push Certificates portal, find the serial number of your current certificate. In Apple Push Certificates Portal, click  **Renew** next to the certificate that has the matching serial number. 

### Renewing SCEP

> TODO

Author: @noahtalerman is it the case that Fleet will do this automatically in the background?

Reviewer: I'm not sure. @mna is this right?

Reviewer 2: To renew SCEP? AFAIK we don't renew it automatically, but I see it gets created with a very long lifetime (10 years), @roperzh might know more about this?

Reviewer 4: that's correct, we don't renew it automatically, however the certificate is created with the validity specified in `mdm.apple_scep_signer_validity_days`, which defaults to 365 (~1 year)

Ideally we would automatically renew this certificate before it expires, but we could optionally change the setting to be something like 10year like Martin initially suspected (other MDMs do this)

Reviewer 4: ah... wait... we're talking about two different SCEP certificates. What I mentioned above is valid for certificates issued to devices for enrollment. Seems like this is for the CA, sorry about that.

As Martin mentioned, we're issuing a certificate that's valid for 10 years when you run `fleetctl generate mdm-apple`. After that, the certificate renewal is not automatic.

Reviewer 4: yes, that's a great summary!

* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_BM_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-bm-key-bytes)

Confirm that Fleet is set up by visitng the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

2. Look at the **Apple Business Manager** section.

`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl get mdm-apple`.

You should see information about the ABM server token such as organization name and renewal date. 

### Step 5: set Fleet to be the MDM server for Macs in ABM
Finally, we set Fleet to be the MDM for all future Macs purchased via Apple or an authorized reseller. 

1. Log in to [Apple Business Manager](business.apple.com)
2. Click your profile icon in the bottom left
3. Click **Preferences**
4. Click **MDM Server Assignment**
5. Switch Macs to the new Fleet instance.

### Step 6 (optional): set the default team for hosts enrolled via ABM

All automatically-enrolled hosts will be assigned to a default team of your choosing after they are unboxed and set up. The host will receive the configurations and behaviors set for that team. If no default team is set, then the host will be placed in "No Teams". 

> > After a host enrolls it can be transferred to a different team. Learn how [here](./Teams.md#transfer-hosts-to-a-team). Transferring a host automatically enforces the new team's settings and removes the old team's settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> A host can be transferred to a new (not default) team before it enrolls. Learn how [here](./Teams.md#transfer-hosts-to-a-team). Transferring a host will automatically enforces the new team's settings when it enrolls.
```

How to renew the certificate if it's expired or about to expire:

1. Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. 

2. Sign in to [Apple Push Certificates Portal](https://identity.apple.com) using the same Apple ID you used to get your original certificate. 

> 3. In the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page, under Apple Push Certificates portal, find the serial number of your current certificate. In Apple Push Certificates Portal, click  **Renew** next to the certificate that has the matching serial number. 

Author: @noahtalerman There's more to this, isn't there? You need to go get a new CSR, then re-upload it and get a new cert then put the new certs into the Fleet server env vars? 

This is what I get when I tried it with a restaurant MDM: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5359586/229250212-d6ba61d3-5177-471f-a496-c5780480d920.png)

Reviewer: > You need to go get a new CSR, then re-upload it and get a new cert then put the new certs into the Fleet server env vars?

@zhumo that's right. I think this is partially covered by step (1):

> Run the `fleetctl generate mdm-apple --email <email> --org <org>` command. 

That said, I think we should be more explicit about the required files for APNs renewal. Something like 

```
### Step 1: generate required files
To renew APNs, we need to generate the two following files:
1. New APNs certificate 
2. New APNs private key 

<Fleet UI and fleetctl instructions for generating APNs CSR and key>

You can ignore the SCEP certificate and SCEP key. You don't need these to renew APNs.
```

And for step 2, renew certificate, we should be more explicit:

```
### Step 2: renew APNs certificate in Apple Push Certificates Portal

1. Log in to or enroll in [Apple Push Certificates Portal](https://identity.apple.com) using the same Apple ID you used to get your original APNs certificate.
2. In the Fleet UI, in the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page, under Apple Push Certificates portal, find the serial number of your current certificate. 
3. In Apple Push Certificates Portal, click  **Renew** next to the certificate that has the matching serial number. 
4. Upload your CSR.
5. Download the new APNs certificate. 
```

And step 3, configure Fleet:

```
### Step 3: configure Fleet with the required files

With the two generated files, we now give them to the Fleet server. 

Restart the Fleet server with the contents of the APNs certificate and APNs private key in following environment variables:
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_CERT_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-cert-bytes)
* [FLEET_MDM_APPLE_APNS_KEY_BYTES](https://fleetdm.com/docs/deploying/configuration#mdm-apple-apns-key-bytes)

> You do not need to provide the APNs CSR which was emailed to you or the SCEP certificate and SCEP key which were generated in step 1.

Confirm that Fleet is set up by visiting the "Fleet UI" or using "fleetctl."

Fleet UI:

1. Head to the **Settings > Integrations > Mobile device management (MDM)** page.

2. Look at the **Apple Push Certificates Portal** section.

2. Follow the on-screen instructions.
`fleetctl` CLI:

1. Run `fleetctl get mdm-apple`.

You should see information about the new APNs certificate such as serial number and renewal date. 
```
